## Entry 511

MATH260: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. It is expected that the students will:  

learn basic methods of linear algebra;
learn how to apply them;
get enough expirience with technical tools of linear algebra;
be able to show results of their study during the exams.

 
Matrices, determinants and systems of linear equations.  Vector  spaces,   the  Euclidian  space, inner product spaces, linear transformations. Eigenvalues, diagonalization.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360260

---

## Entry 512

MATH261: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This course aims to cover the basic tools of linear algebra, and provides a rigorous theoretical treatment of the subject while at the same time addressing issues of computational aspects. This includes a thorough study of linear transformations and the theory of matrices. These concepts are crucial to many theoretical and practical applications of linear algebra.
 
Matrices and systems of linear equations. Vector spaces; subspaces, sums and direct sums of subspaces. Linear dependence, bases, dimension, quotient spaces. Linear transformations, kernel, range, isomorphism. Spaces of linear transformations, Hom (V,W),V*, V** transpose. Representations of linear transformations by matrices, similarity. Determinants.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360261

---

## Entry 513

MATH262: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. By the end of the course the student will learn

eigenvalue and eigenvector concept, their computation and uses.
diagonalizability and diagonalization process
Jordan canonical forms and rational canonical forms of linear operators/matrices
inner product spaces, orthogonality; normal, unitary, self-adjoint, orthogonal linear operators /matrices .

 
Characteristic and minimal polynomials of an operator, eigenvalues, diagonalizability, canonical forms, Smith normal form, Jordan and rational forms of matrices. Inner product spaces, norm and orthogonality, projections. Linear operators on inner product spaces, adjoint of an operator, normal, self adjoint, unitary and positive operators. Bilinear and quadratic forms.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360262

---

## Entry 514

MATH267: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of the course students are expected to learn the fundemental notions of abstract algebra. The student is expected to understand and process the basics of algebraic structures, specifically basics of group theory. Objectives include the ability to follow and understand proofs of standard theorems of abstract algebra.
 
Binary Operations, Groups, Subgroups, Subgroups generated by a set, Cyclic groups (generators and subgroups), Cosets and Lagrange?s Theorem. Normal Subgroups and Quotient groups, Homomorphisms and Isomorphisms, Permutation groups, Finite symmetric groups, Group actions, The orbit Stabilizer Theorem, Cayley?s Theorem, Conjugacy classes and the class equation, Cauchy?s theorem, Sylow theorems, Direct products, The fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360267

---

## Entry 515

MATH301: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This course is a calculus based introductory course on probability theory. The
emphasis is on the main concepts, calculations and applications, rather than the
measure theoretical foundations. Therefore, measure theoretical issues are only
mentioned in passing. Sketches of the main theorems such as the law of large numbers
and the central limit theorem are given, assuming preparatory results from analysis
without proof. The course provides students with essential basic knowledge in
probability theory, hence preparing them for various real-world applications or more
advanced courses.
 
Events and probability. Combinatorial problems. Independence and conditional probability. Measure theoretical approach to probability. Random variables and distribution functions. Marginal distributions and conditional distributions. Moments and characteristic functions. Convergence of random variables. Law of large numbers.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360301

---

## Entry 516

MATH303: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. After completing this course, the student should be familiar with:

The main numerical notations that have been used in the world
Egyptian and Babylonian problem solving techniques
Canonical Greek mathematical authors (Euclid, Archimedes, Apollonius) and their works
Late Antique Greek mathematics
Indian and Chinese mathematics
The Graeco-Arabic translation movement
the achievements of writers in Islamic civilizations in geometry and algebra

 
Mathematics in Egypt and Mesopotamia, Ionia and Pythagoreans, paradoxes of Zeno and the heroic age. Mathematical works of Plato, Aristotle, Euclid of Alexandria, Archimedes, Appolonius and Diophantus. Mathematics in China and India.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360303

---

## Entry 517

MATH304: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Mathematics of the Renaissance, Islamic contributions. Solution of the cubic equation and consequences. Invention of logarithms. Time of Fermat and Descartes. Development of the limit concept. Newton and Leibniz. The age of Euler. Contributions of Gauss and Cauchy. Non-Euclidean geometries. The arithmetization of analysis. The rise of abstract algebra. Aspects of the twentieth century.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360304

---

## Entry 518

MATH319: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. By the end of the course, students will have learned the basics of measure theory and have a solid understanding of Lebesgue integrable functions and Lebesgue measurable sets.
 
Review of Riemann integration. Sets of (Lebesgue) measure zero in Rn and charac-terization of Riemann integrable functions. Lebesgue integrable functions and the Lebesgue integral in Rn. Convergence theorems, theorems of Lusin and Egorov. Fubini`s theorem. Selected applications.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360319

---

## Entry 519

MATH320: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This is an introductory course to axiomatic set theory. We shall learn the axiomatic system ZFC, the Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with Choice. The main objectives of this course are

to understand how ZFC provides a foundation for (virtually all) mathematics,
to learn about some set-theoretic techniques that are frequently used in mathematics,
to learn about set theory as a field of mathematics on its own.

 
Language and axioms of set theory. Ordered pairs, relations and functions. Order relation and well ordered sets. Ordinal numbers, transfinite induction, arithmetic of ordinal numbers. Cardinality and arithmetic of cardinal numbers. Axiom of choice, generalized continuum hypothesis.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360320

---

## Entry 520

MATH341: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Graphs, varieties of graphs, connectedness, extremal graphs, blocks, trees, partitions, line graphs, planarity, Kuratowsky`s theorem, colorability, chromatice numbers, five color theorem, four  color conjecture.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360341

---

## Entry 521

MATH349: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. 
The students will learn the basic results in the field and get expirience in standard methods of real analysis.
The students will get acquainted with the basic notions of the real number system (axioms, convergence, limit superior/inferior of real sequences, etc.).
The students will get acquainted with the basic notions of metric spaces (topological properties, continuity/equicontinuity of functions, products, completion, compactness, connectedness, contraction mappings principles and their applications, Tietze extension theorem, Baire's theorem, etc.)

 
LUB Property of real numbers. Compactness, connectedness, limits and continuity in metric spaces. Sequences and series of scalars, complete metric spaces, limsup. Sequences and series of functions, uniform convergence, applications.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360349

---

## Entry 522

BIOL353: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. 1. Describe the structures, chemical properties and functions of biomolecules.
2. Explain the energy transformations in biological systems.
3. Explain the general principles of metabolism and its regulation.
 
This course provides the students with the basic concepts of biochemistry. An introduction to properties of aqueous systems, description of the structure and functions of proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acids are covered. Discussions will be made on metabolic reactions of these biomolecules with emphasis on bioenergetics and their regulation, and on the expression and transmission of genetic information.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380353

---

## Entry 523

BIOL355: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. By the end of the course students will be able to perform necessary skills to experiment on microorganisms and write reports on their findings
 
 
Laboratory course for 2380 303.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380355

---

## Entry 524

BIOL356: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. After taking this course, students will form a general awareness to their environment with respect to the available flora. General observation of the flora, collecting data, and analyzing their findings will become possible. Various aspects of plant structure and function as well as biodiversity and evolution of plant species will be tought.
 
An introductory course on plant sciences, which covers mainly the elementary aspects of plant morphology (forms and structures of plant parts), plant physiology (functional processes), plant ecology (relationships between plants and their environment) and plant genetics (inheritance of traits in plants).

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380356

---

## Entry 525

BIOL405: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. 1. Explain how the mucosal immune system operates (principles of mucosal immunology; microbiota and the immune system; tolerance induction; helminthic infections)
2. Describe failures of Host Defense Mechanisms (evasion and subversion by pathogens; primary and secondary immunodeficiencies)
3. Explain Allergy and Allergic Diseases (Hypersensitivity reactions, regulatory mechanisms, mast cells, basophils, eosinophils)
4. Describe Autoimmunity (Mechanisms of central & peripheral tolerance development, organ-specific & systemic autoimmune diseases)
5.  Explain principles of Transplantation immunology (including fetal tolerance and immune-suppressive treatments)
6. Explain Tumor Immunology (immune evasion, development of suppressor cells, immunotherapeutic approaches to treat cancers)
7. Explain inflammation relation with neurodegenerative diseases and aging
 
Introduction to failures of host defense mechanisms, allergy and allergic diseases, autoimmunity, and manipulation of the immune response
Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380405

---

## Entry 526

BIOL435: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. No objective 
This course aims to introduce the students to the vast animal diversity from an evolutionary perspective. Animal groups in systematic order follow a brief theoretical introduction on speciation, zoogeography and taxonomy. Each group is treated in terms of its evolutionary relationship, basic form and function, reproductive biology, basic ecology and relevance to human systems  (agriculture, medicine, etc.) Presentations include audio-visual material.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380435

---

## Entry 527

MATH361: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Primitive roots of an integer, Integers n for which Z_n^* is cyclic, Theory of indices, Quadratic residues, Legendre symbol, Quadratic Reciprocity Law, Solving quadratic congruences. Perfect numbers, Mersenne primes, Fermat numbers, Fibonacci numbers, Linear Diophantine equations, Pythagorean triples, Quadratic Diophantine equations, Fermat?s Infinite descent (x^4+-y^4=z^2 equations), Representing integers as sums of squares, Pell`s equation, Finite and infinite continued fractions, Solving Pell`s equation using continued fractions.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360361

---

## Entry 528

BIOL445: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. By the end of this course the students will know and recite essential physiological motifs in major bacterial groups
 
A course on distribution and regulation of major routes of energy supply among microorganisms; Photosynthesis in Cyano bacteria and anoxygenic photographic bacteria, Halobacterial photophosphorylation, carbon dioxide metabolism in nonphototrophic autotrophs and heterotrophs. Microbial metabolism of hydrogen, oxidation of iron and sulfur compounds, Methylotrophs and methanogens are discussed. Applications in biotechnology are also mentioned with reference to each physiological group.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380445

---

## Entry 529

MATH366: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This course  is  the second part of a sequel of a basic number theory courses which  involves several types of  Diophantine equations, factorization of elements and ideals in quadratic extensions. This course exhibits some historical and modern aspects of number theory focusing on algebraic structures.
 
Arithmetic in quadratic fields. Factorization theory. Continued fractions, periodicity. Transcendental numbers.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360366

---

## Entry 530

MATH367: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. The main purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to the subject of algebra. The emphasis is on groups, rings, fields, and some related structures.
 
Groups. Isomorphism theorems, direct pro-ducts. Groups acting on sets. Class equation. Statements of Sylow theorems and the F.T. on finite abelian groups. Rings, isomorphism theorems. Prime and maximal ideals. Integral domains, field of fractions. Euclidean domains, PIDs, UFDs. Polynomials, polynomials in several variables. Field extensions. Impossibility of certain geometric constructions. Finite fields.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360367

---

## Entry 531

MATH368: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. The course focuses on fundamentals of field theory, field extensions and Galois theory. In particular, various types of field extensions such as finite, algebraic, transcendental, separable and normal extensions are discussed. A second theme is a brief introduction to Galois theory along with a proof of the fundamental theorem about Galois correspondence. Various applications of Galois theory such as compass-straightedge constructions and solvability by radicals is discussed. 
 
 
Field extensions, splitting field of a polynomial, multiple roots, Galois group, criteria for solvability by radicals, Galois group as permutation groups of the roots of polynomials of degree n, constructible n-gons, transcendence of e, finite fields.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360368

---

## Entry 532

MATH371: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. By the end of the course the student will learn 
-The basic notions about differential geometry of curves, local information like torsion, curvature and their computations;
-Fundamental Theorem of Local Theory of curves and surfaces;
-The basic notions about differential geometry of regular surfaces, tangent plane, differentiability of maps between surfaces, the notion of differential, orientability, metric properties, the first fundamental form;
-the notion of Gauss map and its fundamental properties and   the second fundamental form, the role of these in deriving local properties of the surface; Gaussian and mean curvatures, principal curvatures and directions, their computation;
-the role of first fundamental form understanding the intrinsic properties of surfaces; the notion of covariant derivative of a vector field on a surface; parallel transport and geodesics, the statement of Gauss-Bonnet Theorem.
 
Curves in R3: Frenet formulas and  Fundamental Theorem. Regular surfaces. Inverse image of regular values. Differentiable functions on surfaces. Tangent  plane; the differential of a map, vector fields, the first fundamental form. Gauss map, second fundamental form, normal, principal curvatures, principal and asymptotic directions. Gauss map in local coordinates. Covariant derivative, geodesics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360371

---

## Entry 533

MATH373: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Foundations: The parallel axiom, models, Hilbert`s theorem. Triangles: Theorems of Menelaus and Ceva, classical remarkable points. Circles: Power of a point with respect to a circle, coaxal systems of circles, inversive geometry. Conic sections: Focus and directrix, reflection property, theorems of Poncelet.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360373

---

## Entry 534

MATH374: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Projective spaces over division rings. Theorems of Desargues and Pappus. Harmonic ranges and pencils, collineations, correlations, involutions, polarities. Affine geometry via `the line at infinity`. Euclidean geometry with `circular points at infinity`. Conic sections and quadric surfaces.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360374

---

## Entry 535

BIOL452: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. 
To learn cloning, transformation and tissue culture strategies used in plant biotechnology.
To learn strategies for plant genetic manipulations against biotic and abiotic stressors.
To learn vaccine, protein and metabolite production in plants.
To understand GMO regulations and public awareness.
To develop reading skills for scientific research papers on plant biotechnology.
To design experiments in plant biotechnology.
To interpret the lecture topics and discuss them with peers.

 
The course covers the basic aspects of plant biotechnology. Particular emphasis will be given to: Manipulation of energy production pathways in plants, environmental factors affecting the overall system and crop productivity, plant growth and development in vitro, plant cell and tissue culture, cloning and somatic cell genetics, conventional and biotechnology supported plant breeding, techniques of transferring foreign genes into plants (Agrobacterium, particle bombardment, etc.), practical application of transgenic plant technology for plant health, human/animal health and nutrition, biosafety aspects of transgenic plants. The future of plant biotechnology will be also covered.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380452

---

## Entry 536

MATH381: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. Student will learn how to solve mathematical problems numerically, which cannot be solved analytically.
 
Convergence, stability, error analysis and conditioning. Solving systems of linear equations: The LU and  Cholosky factorization, pivoting, error analysis in Gaussian elimination. Matrix eigenvalue problem, power method, orthogonal factorizations and least squares problems. Solutions of nonlinear equations. Bisection, Newton`s, secant and fixed point iteration methods.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360381

---

## Entry 537

MATH382: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of this course, the student will gain:

an ability to apply knowledge of different numerical interpolation techniques for approximating functions
an ability to apply knowledge of numerical differentiation via interpolation.
an ability to apply knowledge of numerical integration approaches via interpolation.

 
Approximating functions: polynomial interpolation, divided differences, Hermite interpolation, spline interpolation, the B-splines, Taylor Series, least square app-roximation. Numerical differentiation and integration based on interpolation. Richardson extrapolation, Gaussian quadrature, Romberg integration, adaptive quadrature, Bernoulli polynomials and Euler-Maclaurin formula.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360382

---

## Entry 538

BIOL454: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY. By the end of the course, the students will know the essentials on adaptive morphology and behavior of birds as well as be able to identify common birds in the field.
 
A course for senior students, emphasizing adaptive morphology and behavior of birds. Lectures cover various aspects of the biology of birds, including morphology, physiology, systematic, evolution, behavior, ecology, and biogeography, with examples from the regional avifauna. Laboratory and fieldwork include studies of skeletons and plumages, teaching basic identification skills and field work (censusing, recording behavior, breeding ecology) on common species.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=238&course_code=2380454

---

## Entry 539

MATH386: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Legendre functions: Generating Function of Legendre polynomials. Recurrence relations, series of Legendre polynomials. Legendre differential equation. Associated Legendre functions. Hermite polynomials. Recurrence relations. Hermite`s differential equations. Laguerre functions, Laguerre differential equations, associated Laguerre polynomials.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360386

---

## Entry 540

MATH390: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Introductory information about reduce. Structure of programs, built in prefix operators. Procedures. A computer Algebra system. How to use a Computer Algebra systems. Representations of polynomials, rational functions, algebraic functions, matrices and series. Advanced algorithms. g.c.d. in several variables. Other applications of modular methods. P-adic Methods. Formal integration and differential equations.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360390

---

## Entry 541

MATH396: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Basic problem-solving strategies. A heuristic search principle. Problem reduction and AND/OR graphs. Expert systems and knowledge representation. An expert system shell. Planning. Language processing with grammar rules. Machine learning. Game playing. Logic and uncertainty. Meta programming.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360396

---

## Entry 542

MATH401: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. To introduce and justify principle concepts of probability theory. It presents basic principles of probability theory by providing rigouros proof; constructing of examples; and solving of exercises. Special attention is paid to basic theory of random variables and random processes: laws of large numbers, central limit theorem,  Markov chains and limit theorems for them.
 
Events and probability. Combinatorial problems and equally likely events. Probability spaces. Independence and finite product spaces. Random variables and distribution functions. Integration of random variables. Lp - spaces. Convergence of random variables. Conditional expectation. Canonical space of a stochastic process. Markov chains. Martingales.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360401

---

## Entry 543

MATH402: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. Computational science, engineering, and applied mathematics face a growing need to develop algorithms, methods, and simulation codes that solve difficult and large scale problems. Solutions are desired that can provide designs, controls, and inversion results for the best choice of input parameters. Optimization algorithms can provide computer scientist, engineers, and mathematicians an avenue to the most desirable solution, automate the execution, and achieve efficient convergence rates.
This course is designed for undergraduate students majoring in mathematics as well as mathematically inclined engineering students. At the end of this course, the student will:

learn the central ideas behind algorithms for the numerical solution of differentiable optimization problems by presenting key methods for both unconstrained and constrained optimization, as well as providing theoretical justification as to why they succeed;
learn the computational tools to solving optimization problems on computers once a mathematical formulation has been found.

 
The importance of optimization, basic definition and facts on convex analysis. Theory of linear programming and convex prog-ramming, simplex method and its  applications, nonlinear programming, search methods, basic ideas of classical variational calculus, optimal control theory. Pontraygin`s maximum principle and dynamic programming, linear theory of optimal control.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360402

---

## Entry 544

MATH404: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Riesz spaces (vector lattices). Riesz subspaces, ideals  and bands. Normed Riesz spaces. Order convergence, relatively uniform convergence and norm convergence. Operators on Riesz spaces.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360404

---

## Entry 545

MATH406: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
First order language, structures and satisfaction. Completeness and compactness theorems. Isomorphism, elementary equivalence and elementary imbedding. Löwenheim-Skolem theorem. Interpolation and definability. Atomic, universal and saturated models and their characterisation. Extensions of first order logic.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360406

---

## Entry 546

MATH407: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Strategic games, Nash equilibrium, Bayesian Games, Mixed, Correlated, Evolutionary equilibrium, extensive games with perfect information, bargaining games, reðeated games, extensive games with imperfect information, sequential equilibrium, coalition games, core, stable sets, bargaining aets, shapley value, market games.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360407

---

## Entry 547

MATH410: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Introduction to numerical and symbolical computational tools. Balance equations, continuos system models and partial differential equations. Introduction to numerical methods for ordinary and partial differential equations. Case studies from mechanics, fluid dynamics, heat and mass transfer, electrical engineering. Introduction to stochastic process and differential equations. Models from mathematical finance.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360410

---

## Entry 548

MATH420: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of this course, the student will learn:

the fundamental concepts of point-set topology
the notions of compactness and connectedness
the countability and separation axioms
the quotient topology with its properties

 
 
 
 
Topological Spaces; basis, subbasis, subspaces. Closed sets, limit points. Hausdorff Spaces. Continuous functions, homeomorphisms. Product topology. Connected spaces, compo-nents, path connectedness, path components. Compactness, sequential compactness, compactness in metric spaces. Definition of regular and normal spaces. Urysohn`s Lemma, Tietsze Extension Theorem.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360420

---

## Entry 549

MATH421: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. .
 
Convex sets, subdivision problems, isoperimetric inequality, Minkowski sum; polytopes, Dehn-Sommerville equations, scissors  equivalence; Erdös distance set problem, line arrangements, counting lattice points; packing, covering and tiling problems

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360421

---

## Entry 550

MATH422: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of the course, the student will learn 

topological surface concept
basic techniques to construct new surfaces
invariants of topological surfaces
classification of compact connected surfaces

 
Topology of subsets of Euclidean space. Topological surfaces. Surfaces in Rn. Surfaces via gluing, connected sum and the classification of compact connected surfaces. Simplicial complexes and simplicial surfaces (simplicial complexes with underlying spaces that are topological surfaces). Euler characteristic.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360422

---

## Entry 551

MATH423: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. Topology studies how a shape or object is connected. In the past few years, there has been an increased interest in the development and use of topological methods for solving various problems in science and engineering. This new line of study is called Computational Topology or Applied Algebraic Topology. Computational topology combines topological results with efficient algorithms to analyze data and solve problems in many fields, including computer graphics and image analysis, neural networks and sensor networks, clustering, robotics, genetics, protein biochemistry, geography, and others. The aim of this course is to give a crash course on topology and geometry with an emphasis on the algorithmic computations for students who are interested in the application side of mathematics.
 
Basic topology, Surfaces and their triangulations, Complexes, Homology, Persistence homology, Morse functions, Discrete Morse Functions, Applications.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360423

---

## Entry 552

MATH424: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of the semester a successful student will

Describe a given covering space and its Galois group (in reasonable cases)
Describe the covering space of a given space together a specified Galois group (in reasonable cases)
Determine topological invariants of covering spaces such as Euler number.
Describe the relation between the rings and fields of (continuous or analytic) functions on the base and the total space of a covering space of surfaces.
Determine and explain solutions of 2nd order linear ODEs near regular singular points.

 
Basics of topological spaces, fundamental groups covering spaces, topological Galois Theory, functions on surfaces, differential equations, regular singular points and differential equations of Fuchsian type

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360424

---

## Entry 553

MATH430: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Mappings. Time series. Orbits. Periodic orbits. Fixed points and periodic points. Finding periodu points. Eventually periodic points. Families of mappings and bifurcations. Transitivity. Sensitive dependence. Dense periodic points. One-dimensional chaos. Devaney ingredients. The logistic map. Period-three points and chaos. Period-doubling bifurcation, Two-dimensional chaos. The Henon map. The Horseshoe map. Dimensions. Systems of differential equations. Homoclinic chaos. Dynamics on labels, Fractals. Abstract similarity map, Abstract similarity sets, Labeling. Chaos in stochastic processes

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360430

---

## Entry 554

MATH432: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Well-formed formulas of Peano arithmetic, Gödel numbering, primitive recursive functions, Gödels Incompleteness Theorems, partial recursive functions, Turing machines, Church-Turing Thesis, decidabilitiy, recursion theorem, s-m-n theorem, padding lemma, recursively enumerable sets, computable approximations, halting problem, creative sets, simple sets, Turing reducibility, Turing degrees, properties of Turing degrees, recursively enumerable degrees, joins, Turing jump.
Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360432

---

## Entry 555

MATH441: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Statics of rigid bodies, statics of  suspended strings and  cables. Kinematics of a particle. Translation, rotation of rigid body about an axis and about a fixed point, relative motion. Dynamics of a particle, harmonic oscillators, motion of a simple pendulum, flight of a projectile, motion under the action of central forces. Dynamics of a system of particles, motion of a body with varying mass.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360441

---

## Entry 556

MATH461: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This course is to provide  the background for students who are willing to learn more about rings and modules which are  the fundamental mathematical structures occuring everywhere !  It is useful for everyone but especially for students who are planning to study  any  algebra related topics such as algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, analysis.
Approximately half of the semester will be on rings, the second half will be on modules.  Rings will be  a more detailed but much faster version of some of the topics  you have seen in Math 367, and  Math 116.   Modules will be new to you. They are generalizations of  vector spaces also generalization of abelian groups.  (Modules over group algebras|rings are examples of groups acting on vector spaces.)
Thus in  module theory  linear algebra comes up  quite often.  You should be comfortable using linear algebra to get more out of this course. We will see the primary decomposition theorem for  finitely generated modules over a Euclidean domain. Usually there is not enough time to cover tensor products.
 
Classical  theory of rings, ideal theory, isomorphism theorems. The group ring. Localization. Submodules, direct products direct sums, factor modules and factor rings. Homomorphisms. Classical isomorphism the-orems. The endomorphism ring of a module. Free modules, free and divisible abelian groups. Tensor product of modules. Finitely generated modules over principal ideal domains.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360461

---

## Entry 557

MATH463: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This course aims
·  to teach the concepts listed in the Catalog Description  such as  group, group homomorphism, subgroup and quotient group, Isomorphism Theorems, group actions , Sylow Theorems and  their applications, solvable groups, nilpotent groups.
· to improve the  proficiency in dealing with abstract concepts,  and writing down simple proofs.
· to improve the proficiency in giving examples of  the abstract concepts.
 
Group, subgroup, normal subgroup, cyclic subgroup, coset, quotient group. Commutator subgroup, center, homomorphism and isomorphism theorems (invariant subgroup, wreath products), Abelian groups. Free abelian group, rank of an abelian group. Divisible abelian group, periodic Abelian group. Sylow Theorems and their applications, soluble groups, nilpotent groups.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360463

---

## Entry 558

MATH464: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of this course, the student will learn:

basic concepts used in representation theory, such as modules,  decomposing modules, into irreducibles
computing character tables
obtaining information about the group from the character table of the group

 
Group representations, FG-Modules, Machke Theorem, irreducible modules and group algebras, characters, inner products of characters, the number of irreducible characters, character table, induced modules and characters, algebraic integers and real representations.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360464

---

## Entry 559

MATH466: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. The aim of this course is to introduce students to the basic principles of geometric symmetries. We will study certain finitely generated groups by exploring the geometric properties of spaces on which these groups act. In summary, the main purpose is to teach how to relate groups and geometry.
 
Symmetry. Isometrics of R?, the Euclidean group, symmetry groups of regular polygons and polyhedra, classification of finite subgroups of the three dimensional rotation group. Frieze groups, crystals, wallpaper groups, groups of acting on trees. Reflection groups, root systems, classification of finite reflection groups, crystallographic root systems and Weyl groups.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360466

---

## Entry 560

MATH471: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. At the end of this course, the students are expected to explain Euclid's Parallel Postulate and why there are other geometries in which it does not hold, provide models of the hyperbolic plane, describe the Möbius transformations of the hyperbolic plane, and perform calculations involving lengths, distances, angles and areas in the hyperbolic plane.
 
Parallel postulate and the need for non-Euclidean geometry, models of the hyperbolic plane, Möbius group, classification of Möbius transformations, classical geometric notions such as length, distance, isometry, parallelism, convexity, area, trigonometry in the hyperbolic plane, groups acting on the hyperbolic plane, fundamental domains.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360471

---

## Entry 561

MATH473: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Affine varieties. Groebner bases, monomial ideals and Dickson`s Lemma, Hilbert Basis Theorem. Buchberger`s algorithm. Ideal membership problem. The problem of Elimination Theory. Unique factorization and resultants. Resultant and extension Theorem.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360473

---

## Entry 562

MATH476: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. This course is a first introduction to algebraic geometry, through the classical and important topic of algebraic curves. The topic of algebraic curves is central in the development of modern day mathematics and also has many applications. It is expected that students will be able to see the harmonious appearance of several concepts that they learned about in previous courses and appreciate the unity of the subject.
 
Affine and projective plane curves, local properties of plane curves, multiple points, intersection numbers, Bezout`s theorem, Noether`s fundamental theorem. Applications to some enumerative geometry problems. Prerequisite: 2360 367 and 2360 353.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360476

---

## Entry 563

MATH477: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Hilbert `s axioms. Geometry over fields. Segment arithmetic. Area. Construction problems and field extensions.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360477

---

## Entry 564

MATH478: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Time estimates for doing arithmetic, some simple cryptosystems, the idea of public key cryptosystems, RSA, discrete log, knapsack, primality and factoring, the rho method, Fermat factorization, the continued fraction method.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360478

---

## Entry 565

MATH480: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. The purpose of the course is to give an understanding of the essential ideas that underlie the development, analysis, and practical use of  finite difference and finite element methods for approximate solution  ofordinary  and partial differential equations.
 
Initial value problems for ordinary differential equations, Convergence, Stability, Stiffness, Predictor-corrector methods, Boundary value problems, Hyperbolic and Elliptic differential equations, Iterative methods.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360480

---

## Entry 566

MATH486: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Database concepts. Database Management Systems (DBMS). Relational data model and relational DBMS. Use of ER-diagrams in database design. Normalizing relations. Relational algebra and query languages. Structured Query Language (SQL). Oracle and/or Access will be introduced in a laboratory environment.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360486

---

## Entry 567

MATH487: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Mathematical modelling of boundary value problems of partial differential equations. Formulation of Dirichlet and Neumann problems. Green`s function. Asymptotic analysis of solutions. Perturbation techniques.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360487

---

## Entry 568

MATH488: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Introduction to integral equations. Volterra and Fredholm equations. Solutions by Neumann series. Connection with eigenvalue problems. Essentials of calculus of variations, Euler-Lagrange equations, canonical form of the Euler equation, applications to mechanics and mathematical physics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360488

---

## Entry 569

MATH489: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Second order differential equations in phase plane. Linear systems and exponential operators, canonical forms. Stability of equilibria. Lyapunov functions. The existence of periodic solutions. Applications to various  fields.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360489

---

## Entry 570

MATH490: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
The Difference calculus. Linear difference equations: First order equations, high order equations. Systems of difference equations. Basic theory. Linear periodic systems. Stability theory. Linear approximation. Lyapunov`s second method. The Z transform. Asymptotic behaviour of difference equations. Sturmian theory. Oscillation.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360490

---

## Entry 571

MATH493: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Philosophical problems about mathematics, Euclidean and non-Euclidean Geometries. The existence of mathematical objects, mathematical truth, Wittgenstein and Lakatos on mathematics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360493

---

## Entry 572

MATH496: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. The aim of this course is to familiarize students with mathematical research. Students will be asked to choose a research paper, analyze it in detail throughout the semester, try to ask new questions about it and prepare a final presentation both in written and oral form.
 
Individualized reading, and study/research in mathematics for students of high intellectual promise.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360496

---

## Entry 573

MATH497: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS. No objective 
Inner product spaces. Examples of inner product spaces;  Hilbert spaces (definition and examples); convergence in Hilbert spaces; orthogonal complements and the projection theorem; linear functionals and the Riesz representation theorem; applications to various branches of Mathematics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=236&course_code=2360497

---

## Entry 574

CE305: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. This course aims to


equip students with fundamental knowledge about the numerical methods and their application to engineering problems. 


make students assimilate the basic numerical methods used

to solve linear and non-linear equation systems,
to approximate, integrate and differentiate functions and sets of discrete data,
to solve differential equations of initial-value and boundary-value problems



teach students how to construct algorithms necessary to implement the essential numerical and programming techniques into computers.


 
Introduction to mathematical modeling in civil engineering. Accuracy, errors and propagation of errors. Solution methods of solving system of linear and non-linear algebraic equations. Eigenvalue problems. Approximation of functions. Numerical differentiation and integration. Numerical solution of differential equations. Special Topics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620305

---

## Entry 575

CE353: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. To get acquainted all civil engineering students with the transportation field.
 
Introduction to transportation systems. Vehicles, network and terminals as components of transportation systems engineering. Design of transportation facilities emphasizing land transportation. Operations planning of transportation systems and traffic engineering. Models of traffic flow. Traffic analysis at intersections. Basic definitions and computations of level of service. Planning and management techniques.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620353

---

## Entry 576

CE375: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. Hydrologic cycle, hydrometeorology, precipitation, streamflow, evaporation and evapotranspiration, surface and subsurface water interactions, hydrograph analysis and synthesis, groundwater hydrology, rainfall runoff models, flood frequency analysis
 
Hydrologic cycle, hydrometeorology, precipitation, streamflow, evaporation and evapotranspiration, surface and subsurface water interactions, hydrograph analysis and synthesis, groundwater hydrology, rainfall runoff models, flood frequency analysis.(Offered to non-CE students only).

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620375

---

## Entry 577

CE4005: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. The objectives of this proposed course are:
i) to provide necessary knowledge about sustainability, green materials, and sustainable construction practices,
ii) to further the students understanding of the environmental and energetic impacts of construction materials,
iii) to introduce methods to assess how green materials, buildings, and construction processes and to improve communication skills of the students.
Students taking this course are expected to be able to:
- identify criteria essential to determining what makes a building material truly “green”,
- demonstrate concepts of life-cycle analysis including economic and sustainability aspects and apply these concepts to green building materials,
- extend their conventional knowledge of design, for forces acting on structures, to the interaction with the environment in which the materials are put into place.
The objectives relate and contribute to the educational objectives of the department by: adding to the much needed breadth courses, increasing the ability of the students to communicate.
 
Sorry no data is found for the course objective.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5624005

---

## Entry 578

CE405: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. No objective 
Ocean basins, hydrography, ocean currents and waves, chemistry of seawater, fiogeochemical cycling, marine life a]1d ecosystems, satellite oceanography, oceans and climate, ocealographic cruising and data collection, oceanography of seas around Turkey.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620405

---

## Entry 579

CE425: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. At the end of this course, students will be familiar with the fundamentals of the Finite Element Method as well as its applications in various fields.
 
Matrix algebra. Potential energy and Rayleigh-Ritz Method. Element interpolation and local coordinates. Elements based on assumed displacement fields in 1-D. Plane stres analysis. Higher order elements. Computer implementation. Prerequisite: CE383

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620425

---

## Entry 580

CE435: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. The objective is to give the basics about site organization and site procedures of a construction project which support the construction site manager to carry out the production activities.
 
Principles of construction job layout: working schedules; materials; manpower and equipment requirements on the job; organization for building, bridge, tunnel, airport, dam, and harbor sites; Rock drilling and blasting operations, service roads, service bridges, narrow gauge railroads.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620435

---

## Entry 581

CE445: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. At the end of the course, the student is expected to get the necessary knowledge on cements, aggregates, admixtures and water in order to use these materials efficiently and correctly in designing concrete mixes.
 
Properties and types of cements and aggregates. Methods and standards of mixing water. Chemical and mineral admixtures.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620445

---

## Entry 582

CE451: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. To provide analytical tools for those students interested in majoring in transportation to analyze the transport systems.
 
Development of transportation demand and supply models. Analysis of cost functions, cost estimating methods and some general cost function. Merging supply and demand models for network equilibration. Simulation and optimizing approaches for equilibrium. Evaluation of alternative transportation systems. Transport regulation in an inefficient or in an excessive competitive environment. Cost and demand conditions of a regulated industry.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620451

---

## Entry 583

CE452: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. 
Introduction of main causes of traffic accidents.
Introduction of the 5E principle for traffic safety.
Data  collection and statistical analysis of road accidents.
GIS-based analysis of accident clustering. 
ITS and new technologies for safer traffic management and enforcement

 
Introduction, causes of traffic accidents, statistical report on road accidents, safety effectiveness of highway design elements, identification of problem locations, data analysis of problem locations, accident reporting systems, education and training, rescue and hospital services.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620452

---

## Entry 584

CE453: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. Student would accumulate basic knowledge on

the evolution of transportation systems and modes
mathematical representation of transportation networks
understanding the parameters affecting travel demand decision making
algorithms of shortest paths in a traffic network
how to estimating flow capacity and cost of assignment in traffic networks
the upcoming travel demand issues, technologies and applications

 
A course introducing development of transportation sytems (air, rail, water and land) and available modes (transit bus and rail, private car, etc.) in the world and in Turkey. Freight and passenger transprotation. Future aspects (intelligent transportation systems, intermodal, etc.). Graphical representation of transportation networks and costs.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620453

---

## Entry 585

CE454: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. To study the most reliable and cost-effective rehabilitation alternatives for both flexible and rigid pavements. To understand the process of pavement maintenance and rehabilitation techniques in logical sequence involving existing pavement structural evaluation and condition assessment, distress mechanisms, assignment of feasible alternatives and overall design. To provide guidelines to select preferred alternatives using life-cycle costs analysis and non-monetary factors.
 
Introduction and definitions. Pavement condition surveys, materials, structural, and traffic data evaluations. Flexible pavement rehabilitation techniques: crack sealing, surface rehabilitation, hot mix asphalt overlays. Rigid pavement rehabilitation techniques: joint sealing, pressure relief joints, partial and full-depth repairs, slab stabilization and jacking, load transfer rehabilitation, rigid pavement overlay design. Identification of feasible alternatives.  Selection of the preferred alternative._x0001_

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620454

---

## Entry 586

CE457: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. This course intended:

to introduce the basic types of highway facilities, their functions and characteristics
to outline the basic steps for the design of highway facilities covering location study and surveys
to study design inputs and parameters emphasizing the effect of vehicular performance, stopping sight distance and passing sight distance
to learn the basic features of highway geometry, elements of horizontal alignment, transition theory and superelevation, vertical alignment and vertical curves, sight distance considerations in alignment design
to study earthwork pay items and earthwork transportation by the use of mass curve
To learn the basics of pavement design and drainage practices
To practice highway geometric design by using one of a well-known highway design software (Autocad Civil 3D or Bentley Inroads)

 
Stopping and passing sight distance, zero line application simple horizontal curve, compound and reverse curves, transition length and superelevation, surface and subsurface drainage, culvert design, types of pavements, material characteristics for subgrade, subbase, base, binder and wearing courses, thickness design using AASHTO 86 design manual, discussion of other pavement design approaches, properties of concrete, asphaltic concrete.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620457

---

## Entry 587

CE458: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING.   At the end of this course, the students are expected
   To broaden the horizon of the students in the field of hydraulic engineering
   To increase ability to apply knowledge of  fluid mechanics in the field fo hydraulic engineering
   To increase the ability of students to identify, formulate and solve problems in a systematic way.
   To increase the innovative capability and creativity of students
   To increase the ability of students to implement their theoretical knowledge
   To increase their ability to collect, analyze, and interpret data
   To increase their decision-making skills.
   To enhance their design skills
   To inform students about engineering ethics and professional responsibility
   To increase report writing skills
   To increase awareness of students about cost, time and quality issues in construction
   To enhance awareness of students about the impact of engineering projects in a global and   societal context (social, economic, legal and/or environmental implications)

 
 
Dam design concepts. Design of overflow and outlet structures, frontal overflow, side channel, morning glory overfall, siphon, free fall, chute, cascade spillway. Design of dissipation structures, hydraullic jump and stilling basin, drop structures and plunge pools, trajectory basins. Design of bottom outlets, gate types, hydraulics of high head gates, air entrainment, cavitation. Design of intake structures, hydraulic losses, vortex formation, hydraulic loadings, control gates and valves, penstock.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620458

---

## Entry 588

CE465: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. No objective 
Highway and railway fills, earth dams. General principles of design, the choice of the type of dam. The circular arc method of stability analysis; the prediction of pore pressures during construction, steady seepage and rapid drawdown. Special methods of analysis for rock fill dams. Design in earthquake areas.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620465

---

## Entry 589

CE475: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. At the end of this course, the student will learn:

governing equations of groundwater flow
basic concepts used in groundwater flow modeling
analytical and numerical models

 
Governing equations of groundwater flow. Review of modeling techniques and their comparison. Analytical models. Numerical models by finite differences. Applications of selected models.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620475

---

## Entry 590

CE495: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING. This course is aimed is to give basic information to interested undergraduate students on laws and principles governing various engineering activities in the sea environment. This course provides the basic knowledge essential for civil engineers who are planning to take role in the projects which preceed underwater operations and other engineering activities in the sea environment. 
 
Scope of ocean engineering. Basic properties of ocean environment: buoyancy, flotation, stability, flow of ideal fluids, added mass, forces on objects, motion of objects in fluid. Ocean structures: fixed and floating ocean structures, phases of design, loads on ocean structures, probabilistic aspects of design. Principles of diving, human body in ocean environment, decompression sickness, safety, underwater communication, diving in special and extreme conditions, protection of scuba environment.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=562&course_code=5620495

---

## Entry 591

PHYS101: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Physical quantities; vectors and scalars; static equilibrium; uniformly accelerated motion; Newton`s laws; work and energy; conservation of energy; linear momentum; impulse; collisions; angular motion; Newton`s law of gravitation; rotational work, energy, and momentum; mechanical properties of matter.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300101

---

## Entry 592

PHYS106: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. The objective of this course is to provide a calculus-based physics course to help students pursuing advanced studies in engineering develop conceptual understanding of physical principles, the ability to reason, and gain skills for problem solving.
 
Electric charge; electric field; Gauss` law, electric potential; capacitance; current and resistance; circuits; magnetic field; Ampere`s law; Faraday`s law of induction; electro-magnetic oscillations; alternating currents.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300106

---

## Entry 593

PHYS107: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Experimental Studies of Mechanics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300107

---

## Entry 594

PHYS108: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Experimental studies of electricity and magnetism.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300108

---

## Entry 595

PHYS109: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. At the end of this course, the students will have a solid understanding of the fundamental mechanical concepts such as motion, force, energy, conserved quantities and the relationships between these. By using these they will be able to analyze the physical interactions in simple mechanics problems and describe the associated motion. They will also learn about some ubiquitous mechanical phenomena like oscillations, waves and friction.
 
Vectors, translational kinematics and dynamics work and energy, system of particles, rotational kinematics and dynamics, equilibrium, gravitation oscillations, waves, fluid mechanics, statistical mechanics, heat and thermodynamics.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300109

---

## Entry 596

PHYS110: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Electric field and Gauss law, electric potentials capacitors, current and DC circuits, magnetic field, magnetic field due to currents, induction, magnetism of matter, Maxwell`s equations, electromagnetic oscillations and AC circuits, electromagnetic waves.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300110

---

## Entry 597

PHYS111: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Fundamental principles and theories of mechanics; translational motion; rotational motion; gravitation; oscillations.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300111

---

## Entry 598

PHYS112: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Electric charge, Coulomb`s law, electric field and Gauss`s law, electric potential and electric potential energy, capacitance and capacitors, current and resistance, circuits and loop theorems, magnetic field and Ampere`s law, Faraday`s law of induction, alternating currents, Maxwell`s equations, electromagnetic oscillations and waves.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300112

---

## Entry 599

PHYS181: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to construct a framework for understanding mechanics namely motion, Newton's laws of motion, circular motion, energy and momentum conservation laws and vibratory motion. By utilizing this knowledge, students will also be able to relate experimental observations to certain physical laws governing mechanics. 
 
Physics and measurement; vector and scalar quantities; describing motion: one dimensional motion; two dimensional motion; motion and force: dynamics; circular motion; work and energy; conservation of energy; linear momentum; rotational motion; static equilibrium and elasticity; vibrations and waves; sound.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300181

---

## Entry 600

PHYS182: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to construct a framework for understanding electricity and magnetism providing an insight into concepts such as electric charge, electric current, capacitance, dielectrics, conductors, etc. By utilizing this knowledge, students will also be able to relate experimental observations to certain physical laws governing electricity and magnetism. 
 
Electric charge and electric field; electric potential and electric potential energy; electric currents; DC circuits and instruments; magnetism; electromagnetic induction andd Faraday`s law; electromagnetic waves; semiconductors, diodes and transistors.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300182

---

## Entry 601

PHYS200: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. Gain the ability to convert problems into algorithms and solving them using a computer language.
 
Conducting basic computer-based tasks such as document preparation, plotting graphs, analysis and presentation of errors that may arise from computation as well as more complex ones such as converting a problem into an algorithm and solving it using a computer language.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300200

---

## Entry 602

PHYS202: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Special theory of relativity; particle properties of waves; wave properties of particles; Atomic structure; elementary quantum mechanics; many electron atoms; nuclear structure and radioactivity.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300202

---

## Entry 603

PHYS203: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
DC circuit analysis: branch, mesh and node analysis, and the superposition, Thevenin and Norton theorems; Phasers and complex numbers; AC circuit analysis using the same methods used in DC circuits; Power and energy; RLC circuits; Transformers; Diodes and transistors, and their applications; Intro-duction to digital electronics; Transducers.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300203

---

## Entry 604

PHYS209: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. This course aims to provide students with the mathematical tools necessary to solve physical  problems expressed in the form of differential equations, with particular emphasis on methods for solving initial and boundary value problems for ordinary differential equations, Fourier series, and the method of separation of variables for basic partial differential equations.
 
Ordinary differential equations; boundary value problems and characteristic function representations; Fourier transforms; partial differential equations and the methods separation of variables.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300209

---

## Entry 605

PHYS210: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. This course aims to provide the students with the mathematical tools necessary to tackle physics problems, with particular emphasis given to vector calculus, including orthogonal curvilinear coordinates, and functions of a complex variable and elementary complex calculus.
 
Vector analysis; orthogonal curvilinear coordinates; functions of a complex variable.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300210

---

## Entry 606

PHYS213: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Temperature, heat and laws of thermodynamics. Thermal expansion, ideal gases, kinetic theory of gases. The wave nature of light, diffraction, interference, polarization and related phenomena. Special theory of relativity. Early quantum theory and atomic models, introduction to quantum mechanics. Time-independent Schrodinger,s equation and application to simple potentials.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300213

---

## Entry 607

PHYS221: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. The Optics and Waves course comprises two parts: Geometrical optics, physical optics.
This course is the first course having direct relations to Modern Physics, Quantum Physics and Quantum Mechanics.
Emphasizing both theoretical and practical aspects, this course covers a large amount of material in one semester.
The knowledge you will gain in this course will form a basis upon which you will build up new blocks in the future.
 
Introduction; geometrical optics; matrix methods in paraxial optics; aberrations; optical instrumentation and the optics of the eye. superposition of waves; interference of light; coherence; polarization; Fraunhofer diffraction.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300221

---

## Entry 608

PHYS222: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Various experiments on mechanical oscillations, properties of light, geometrical and physical optics, optical properties of matter.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300222

---

## Entry 609

PHYS260: This course belongs to DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS. No objective 
Fundamental ideas and concepts of physics are reviewed and applied to a large number of sports and games. Some demonstrations will be performed.

Course Link: https://catalog.metu.edu.tr/course.php?prog=230&course_code=2300260

---